docs/installation-guide.adoc, before:

= GPUSPH Installation and Quick Start Guide
:toc: left
include::defines.adoc[]
:sectnums:
v{version}

== Introduction

include::common-introduction.adoc[]

== Operating system support

GPUSPH is developed primarily on Linux, with some support for macOS.
It can be built and run on Windows under the WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux).
WSL2 is required to use CUDA GPUs from the WSL, otherwise only the CPU backend will be available.

== Requirements

In developing GPUSPH, an effort has been made to minimize <<Must-have,hard dependencies>> on external libraries and tools.
Most of the dependencies are thus <<optional,optional>>,
and the corresponding features will be automatically disabled if they are not found.
This allows users that not need those features to run GPUSPH without installing additional software.

With the introduction of the CPU backend in GPUSPH v6.0, even CUDA is not a hard dependency anymore,
although it is highly recommended, for performance reasons, to use the CUDA backend whenever possible.

IMPORTANT: this guide does not provide instructions on how to install these dependencies;
please refer to the corresponding installation guides or your distribution package manager for further details.

=== Must-have

As of version {version}, the tools and libraries that are *required* to build GPUSPH are:

* GNU Make, version 4.0 or later;
* a {cpp} compiler with support for {cpp}11;
  GPUSPH has been tested with the GNU compiler and Clang;
* the {url-thrust}[Thrust] library;
  this is distributed with CUDA,
  but may also be installed separately if needed
(e.g. if you only want to run GPUSPH on the CPU, and thus don't need to install the CUDA toolkit);
* common command-line utitlities such as `sed` and `awk`.

On a Debian or Ubuntu systems (including the Windows WSL),
it should be sufficient to install the `build-essential` and `libthrust-dev` packages.

=== Optional requirements [[optional]]

* the https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads[NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit], version 8 or higher,
  to enable the CUDA backend (build and run GPUSPH on NVIDIA GPUs);
+
NOTE: due to the version requirement for CUDA, GPUSPH is only supported on Kepler architecture GPUs
(compute capability 3.0) or newer.

* an MPI library (and corresponding header files), to enable multi-node support in GPUSPH;
  GPUSPH has been tested with OpenMPI, MPICH and MVAPICH2;
+
NOTE: Multi-GPU on a single machine is supported even _without_ MPI.

* {url-chrono}[Project Chrono], version 5 or higher, to enable support fully coupled fluid/structure interaction;
+
NOTE: Bodies with a prescribed motion are supported even _without_ Chrono.

* a compiler with OpenMP support, to enable OpenMP on the CPU backend;
+
NOTE: the CPU backend can run multi-threaded also without OpenMP, by using the `--device` command-line option
to specify the number of threads to run.

* the HDF5 library (and corresponding header files), to enable the H5Sph reader;

* the https://www.paraview.org[ParaView] development files to enable integration with the _in-situ_ visualization
features of ParaView Catalyst

=== Auxiliary tools

By default, GPUSPH test-cases write their results in https://www.vtk.org[VTK] format.
For visualization and post-processing we recommend using https://www.paraview.org[ParaView]
(the go-to choice by GPUSPH developers)
or other similar software such as https://visit-dav.github.io/visit-website/[VisIt].

GPUSPH also comes with some sample processing scripts,
mostly written in https://www.python.org/[Python].

== Getting GPUSPH

GPUSPH is distributed in source-code form.
There are no ready-to-run packages. Each test-case is compiled for the specific backend and architecture on the user machine(s),
in order to provide optimal performance.

=== Setting up the working directory [[workdir-setup]]

The public version of GPUSPH is available on {url-github}[GitHub].
You can fetch the source code for the current release (v{version}) {url-tag}[from the GitHub tag page],
as either a {url-archive}.zip[zip package] or {url-archive}.tar.gz[gzipped tarball].

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
.Example: setting up the working directory from the tarball
----
wget {url-archive}.tar.gz -O gpusph-{version}.tar.gz
tar xzf gpusph-{version}.tar.gz
cd gpusph-{version}
----

If you intend to keep up with GPUSPH development, or wish to contribute, you should use https://git-scm.org[git]

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
.Example: setting up the working directory from git
----
# use {url-git} if you have enabled SSH access on GitHub
git clone {url-github}
cd gpusph
----

NOTE: the zip package and tarball create a working directory named `gpusph-{version}`,
whereas `git` creates a working directory named `gpusph`.

=== A note on the Thrust library

The Thrust library is a <<Must-have,hard requirement>> for GPUSPH.
If you are using the CUDA backend, the Thrust library will be installed
together with the NVIDIA CUDA Development Toolkit.

When using the CPU backend, you may need to install Thrust separately.
We recommend doing this from distribution packages, if possible,
e.g. with
[source,shell]
----
sudo apt-get install libthrust-dev
----
on Debian or Ubuntu, or equivalent on other distributions.

If you do not have permission to install new packages on the machine,
or if your operating system does not have packages for the Thrust library,
you can install it locally. From the GPUSPH working directory, run
[source,shell]
----
git clone --recursive https://github.com/NVIDIA/thrust/
----
and GPUSPH will automatically detect the presence of the library.

== Building GPUSPH

From the <<workdir-setup,GPUSPH working directory>>, just run

[source,shell]
----
make
----

to build the default test case (`DamBreak3D`), or run

[source,shell]
----
make test
----

to build _and_ run it.

=== Building and running test cases

You can get a list of available test cases (`Problem` in GPUSPH terminology) using
[source,shell]
----
make list-problems
----
and building any of them using
[source,shell,subs="+quotes"]
----
make _ProblemName_
----
where `_ProblemName_` is the name of the test case you want to build, e.g.
[source,shell,subs="+quotes"]
----
make LidDrivenCavity2D
----

You can specify multiple test-cases to build them concurrently.
Each problem will be compiled to its own executable, that you can run at any time, e.g.
[source,shell]
----
./LidDrivenCavity2D
----

CAUTION: Some test-cases may requires features such as Chrono to be enabled;
they will fail to build and/or run if the correspondig feature is disabled.
Further down you can find details about <<Customizing your installation>>
to enable the required features,
assuming the correct <<optional,dependencies>> are installed and can be found,
as well as <<overrides,instructions on how to help the build system find some dependencies>>.

[NOTE]
====
Some test-cases require external data files.
If you are connected to the internet, you can fetch them by running
[source,shell]
----
scripts/get-data-files
----
from the GPUSPH working directory.
====

For historical reasons, when building a single test case, a symbolic link to it, named `GPUSPH`, is created.
You can run the test case through the symlink, but this usage is discouraged.
You can check which test-case `GPUSPH` links to
(as well as other information about the version of GPUSPH, the backend used, etc)
by using
[source,shell]
----
./GPUSPH --version
----

A full list of the command-line options supported by GPUSPH can be found by
[source,shell]
----
./GPUSPH --help
----

NOTE: you can also pass the `--version` and `--help` command-line options to any test-case.
All test cases support the command-line options listed by `--help`.
Some test cases support additional, problem-specific command-line options.

See the xref:user-guide[GPUSPH User Guide] for additional details
about the default test-cases, and for instructions about building your own.


== Customizing your installation

The GPUSPH build system is designed to auto-configure most settings,
while still giving control to the user over most aspects.
By default (i.e. when the user does not explicitly set <<Build options,options>>
or <<Build overrides,overrides>>),
it will look for <<optional,optional packages>> in a number of possible locations,
and auto-enabled the corresponding features.

You can run

[source,shell]
----
make show
----

to show the current configuration.

[NOTE]
====
If you need to {url-github}issues/[report an issue],
it's a good idea to attach the output of `make show` to your bug report.
You can save the output of the command to disk, together with any warnings or errors
[source,shell]
----
make show > make-show.log 2>&
----
and then attach `make-show.log` to your report.
====

If the automatic configuration is not to your liking, or one of the <<optional,optional packages>>
was not found automatically, you can customize the configuration through the use of
<<options,options>> and <<overrides,overrides>>.

=== Build options [[options]]

Build options can be set when running `make` to override program-wide optionts such as the backend to be used,
or which features should be enabled/disabled. You can run

[source,shell]
----
make option=value
----

(possibly with multiple `option=value` pairs) to change the value from the default.

NOTE: trying to enable a feature for which auto-detection failed to find the corresponding library
will lead to errors. Use <<overrides,overrides>> to help the library detection find the correct
headers.

Common build options are:
[horizontal]
backend:: selects the backend; accepted values are currently `cuda` and `cpu`;
 the `cuda` backend is automatically selected if the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit is found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<cuda-override,set up the appropriate override>> to help the configuration process;
compute:: selects the compute capability for which the GPU code should be built, when using the `cuda` backend;
 the default is auto-detected from the GPUs available on the system; the expected value is a two-digit number
 such as `61` for the NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080, or `75` for the NVIDIA TITAN RTX
openmp:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) OpenMP support for the `cpu` backend;
mpi:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) multi-node support;
 this is automatically enabled if a supported MPI implementation is found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<mpi-override,set up the appropriate override>> to help the configuration process
linearization:: select the order in which coordinates are processed for linearization (e.g. `xzy`);
 this can have a significant impact on multi-GPU and multi-node performance, based on the problem splitting direction;
chrono:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) fluid/solid interaction through Project Chrono;
 this is automatically enabled if the Chrono library and header files are found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<chrono-override,set up the appropriate override>> to help the configuration process;
hdf5:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) HDF5 support;
 this is automatically enabled if the HDF5 library and header files are found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<hdf5-override,set up the appropriate overrides>> to help the configuration process.

Run `make help-options` for a complete list of available options.


=== Compile-time flags and path overrides [[overrides]]

If auto-detection fails of a library fails, or find the wrong version of a library is found,
you can override the automatic configuration by creating a `Makefile.local` file in the working directory
and setting appropriate variables there.

Some common overrides are:
[horizontal]
[[cuda-override]]CUDA_INSTALL_PATH:: path to where the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit has been installed;
 this is frequently something like `/usr/local/cuda-MAJOR.MINOR`,
 where `MAJOR` and `MINOR` are the major and minor version of the toolkit;
 example: `CUDA_INSTALL_PATH=/usr/local/cuda-11.4`;
[[mpi-override]]MPICXX:: full path to the MPI compiler;
[[chrono-override]]CHRONO_PATH:: path to the location where Project Chrono is installed;
[[hdf5-override]]HDF5_CPP:: preprocessor flags needed to find and use the HDF5 headers;
HDF5_CXX:: compiler flags needed to build programs with HDF5;
HDF5_LD:: linker flags needed to link programs to the HDF5 library;

Run `make help-overrides` for a complete list of available overrides.

Commit message:

Mention how to build the (new) documentation

docs/installation-guide.adoc, after:

= GPUSPH Installation and Quick Start Guide
:toc: left
include::defines.adoc[]
:sectnums:
v{version}

== Introduction

include::common-introduction.adoc[]

== Operating system support

GPUSPH is developed primarily on Linux, with some support for macOS.
It can be built and run on Windows under the WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux).
WSL2 is required to use CUDA GPUs from the WSL, otherwise only the CPU backend will be available.

== Requirements

In developing GPUSPH, an effort has been made to minimize <<Must-have,hard dependencies>> on external libraries and tools.
Most of the dependencies are thus <<optional,optional>>,
and the corresponding features will be automatically disabled if they are not found.
This allows users that not need those features to run GPUSPH without installing additional software.

With the introduction of the CPU backend in GPUSPH v6.0, even CUDA is not a hard dependency anymore,
although it is highly recommended, for performance reasons, to use the CUDA backend whenever possible.

IMPORTANT: this guide does not provide instructions on how to install these dependencies;
please refer to the corresponding installation guides or your distribution package manager for further details.

=== Must-have

As of version {version}, the tools and libraries that are *required* to build GPUSPH are:

* GNU Make, version 4.0 or later;
* a {cpp} compiler with support for {cpp}11;
  GPUSPH has been tested with the GNU compiler and Clang;
* the {url-thrust}[Thrust] library;
  this is distributed with CUDA,
  but may also be installed separately if needed
(e.g. if you only want to run GPUSPH on the CPU, and thus don't need to install the CUDA toolkit);
* common command-line utitlities such as `sed` and `awk`.

On a Debian or Ubuntu systems (including the Windows WSL),
it should be sufficient to install the `build-essential` and `libthrust-dev` packages.

=== Optional requirements [[optional]]

* the https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-downloads[NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit], version 8 or higher,
  to enable the CUDA backend (build and run GPUSPH on NVIDIA GPUs);
+
NOTE: due to the version requirement for CUDA, GPUSPH is only supported on Kepler architecture GPUs
(compute capability 3.0) or newer.

* an MPI library (and corresponding header files), to enable multi-node support in GPUSPH;
  GPUSPH has been tested with OpenMPI, MPICH and MVAPICH2;
+
NOTE: Multi-GPU on a single machine is supported even _without_ MPI.

* {url-chrono}[Project Chrono], version 5 or higher, to enable support fully coupled fluid/structure interaction;
+
NOTE: Bodies with a prescribed motion are supported even _without_ Chrono.

* a compiler with OpenMP support, to enable OpenMP on the CPU backend;
+
NOTE: the CPU backend can run multi-threaded also without OpenMP, by using the `--device` command-line option
to specify the number of threads to run.

* the HDF5 library (and corresponding header files), to enable the H5Sph reader;

* the https://www.paraview.org[ParaView] development files to enable integration with the _in-situ_ visualization
features of ParaView Catalyst;

* httsp:/www.asciidoctor.org[AsciiDoctor] to build the documentation.

=== Auxiliary tools

By default, GPUSPH test-cases write their results in https://www.vtk.org[VTK] format.
For visualization and post-processing we recommend using https://www.paraview.org[ParaView]
(the go-to choice by GPUSPH developers)
or other similar software such as https://visit-dav.github.io/visit-website/[VisIt].

GPUSPH also comes with some sample processing scripts,
mostly written in https://www.python.org/[Python].

== Getting GPUSPH

GPUSPH is distributed in source-code form.
There are no ready-to-run packages. Each test-case is compiled for the specific backend and architecture on the user machine(s),
in order to provide optimal performance.

=== Setting up the working directory [[workdir-setup]]

The public version of GPUSPH is available on {url-github}[GitHub].
You can fetch the source code for the current release (v{version}) {url-tag}[from the GitHub tag page],
as either a {url-archive}.zip[zip package] or {url-archive}.tar.gz[gzipped tarball].

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
.Example: setting up the working directory from the tarball
----
wget {url-archive}.tar.gz -O gpusph-{version}.tar.gz
tar xzf gpusph-{version}.tar.gz
cd gpusph-{version}
----

If you intend to keep up with GPUSPH development, or wish to contribute, you should use https://git-scm.org[git]

[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
.Example: setting up the working directory from git
----
# use {url-git} if you have enabled SSH access on GitHub
git clone {url-github}
cd gpusph
----

NOTE: the zip package and tarball create a working directory named `gpusph-{version}`,
whereas `git` creates a working directory named `gpusph`.

=== A note on the Thrust library

The Thrust library is a <<Must-have,hard requirement>> for GPUSPH.
If you are using the CUDA backend, the Thrust library will be installed
together with the NVIDIA CUDA Development Toolkit.

When using the CPU backend, you may need to install Thrust separately.
We recommend doing this from distribution packages, if possible,
e.g. with
[source,shell]
----
sudo apt-get install libthrust-dev
----
on Debian or Ubuntu, or equivalent on other distributions.

If you do not have permission to install new packages on the machine,
or if your operating system does not have packages for the Thrust library,
you can install it locally. From the GPUSPH working directory, run
[source,shell]
----
git clone --recursive https://github.com/NVIDIA/thrust/
----
and GPUSPH will automatically detect the presence of the library.

== Building GPUSPH

From the <<workdir-setup,GPUSPH working directory>>, just run

[source,shell]
----
make
----

to build the default test case (`DamBreak3D`), or run

[source,shell]
----
make test
----

to build _and_ run it.

=== Building and running test cases

You can get a list of available test cases (`Problem` in GPUSPH terminology) using
[source,shell]
----
make list-problems
----
and building any of them using
[source,shell,subs="+quotes"]
----
make _ProblemName_
----
where `_ProblemName_` is the name of the test case you want to build, e.g.
[source,shell,subs="+quotes"]
----
make LidDrivenCavity2D
----

You can specify multiple test-cases to build them concurrently.
Each problem will be compiled to its own executable, that you can run at any time, e.g.
[source,shell]
----
./LidDrivenCavity2D
----

CAUTION: Some test-cases may requires features such as Chrono to be enabled;
they will fail to build and/or run if the correspondig feature is disabled.
Further down you can find details about <<Customizing your installation>>
to enable the required features,
assuming the correct <<optional,dependencies>> are installed and can be found,
as well as <<overrides,instructions on how to help the build system find some dependencies>>.

[NOTE]
====
Some test-cases require external data files.
If you are connected to the internet, you can fetch them by running
[source,shell]
----
scripts/get-data-files
----
from the GPUSPH working directory.
====

For historical reasons, when building a single test case, a symbolic link to it, named `GPUSPH`, is created.
You can run the test case through the symlink, but this usage is discouraged.
You can check which test-case `GPUSPH` links to
(as well as other information about the version of GPUSPH, the backend used, etc)
by using
[source,shell]
----
./GPUSPH --version
----

A full list of the command-line options supported by GPUSPH can be found by
[source,shell]
----
./GPUSPH --help
----

NOTE: you can also pass the `--version` and `--help` command-line options to any test-case.
All test cases support the command-line options listed by `--help`.
Some test cases support additional, problem-specific command-line options.

See the xref:user-guide[GPUSPH User Guide] for additional details
about the default test-cases, and for instructions about building your own.

=== Building the documentation

If you have https:://www.asciidoctor.org[AsciiDoctor] installed,
you can build the documentation locally using
[source,shell]
----
make docs
----
This will make the <<installation-guide.adoc#,Installation Guide>>
available under `docs/installation-guide.html`, and the
<<user-guide.adoc#,User Guide>>
available under `docs/user-guide.html`.
These are plain HTML files that you can read using your preferred web browser.

== Customizing your installation

The GPUSPH build system is designed to auto-configure most settings,
while still giving control to the user over most aspects.
By default (i.e. when the user does not explicitly set <<Build options,options>>
or <<Build overrides,overrides>>),
it will look for <<optional,optional packages>> in a number of possible locations,
and auto-enabled the corresponding features.

You can run

[source,shell]
----
make show
----

to show the current configuration.

[NOTE]
====
If you need to {url-github}issues/[report an issue],
it's a good idea to attach the output of `make show` to your bug report.
You can save the output of the command to disk, together with any warnings or errors
[source,shell]
----
make show > make-show.log 2>&
----
and then attach `make-show.log` to your report.
====

If the automatic configuration is not to your liking, or one of the <<optional,optional packages>>
was not found automatically, you can customize the configuration through the use of
<<options,options>> and <<overrides,overrides>>.

=== Build options [[options]]

Build options can be set when running `make` to override program-wide optionts such as the backend to be used,
or which features should be enabled/disabled. You can run

[source,shell]
----
make option=value
----

(possibly with multiple `option=value` pairs) to change the value from the default.

NOTE: trying to enable a feature for which auto-detection failed to find the corresponding library
will lead to errors. Use <<overrides,overrides>> to help the library detection find the correct
headers.

Common build options are:
[horizontal]
backend:: selects the backend; accepted values are currently `cuda` and `cpu`;
 the `cuda` backend is automatically selected if the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit is found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<cuda-override,set up the appropriate override>> to help the configuration process;
compute:: selects the compute capability for which the GPU code should be built, when using the `cuda` backend;
 the default is auto-detected from the GPUs available on the system; the expected value is a two-digit number
 such as `61` for the NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080, or `75` for the NVIDIA TITAN RTX
openmp:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) OpenMP support for the `cpu` backend;
mpi:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) multi-node support;
 this is automatically enabled if a supported MPI implementation is found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<mpi-override,set up the appropriate override>> to help the configuration process
linearization:: select the order in which coordinates are processed for linearization (e.g. `xzy`);
 this can have a significant impact on multi-GPU and multi-node performance, based on the problem splitting direction;
chrono:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) fluid/solid interaction through Project Chrono;
 this is automatically enabled if the Chrono library and header files are found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<chrono-override,set up the appropriate override>> to help the configuration process;
hdf5:: enables (`1`) or disables (`0`) HDF5 support;
 this is automatically enabled if the HDF5 library and header files are found;
 if it's not auto-detected, you can <<hdf5-override,set up the appropriate overrides>> to help the configuration process.

Run `make help-options` for a complete list of available options.


=== Compile-time flags and path overrides [[overrides]]

If auto-detection fails of a library fails, or find the wrong version of a library is found,
you can override the automatic configuration by creating a `Makefile.local` file in the working directory
and setting appropriate variables there.

Some common overrides are:
[horizontal]
[[cuda-override]]CUDA_INSTALL_PATH:: path to where the NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit has been installed;
 this is frequently something like `/usr/local/cuda-MAJOR.MINOR`,
 where `MAJOR` and `MINOR` are the major and minor version of the toolkit;
 example: `CUDA_INSTALL_PATH=/usr/local/cuda-11.4`;
[[mpi-override]]MPICXX:: full path to the MPI compiler;
[[chrono-override]]CHRONO_PATH:: path to the location where Project Chrono is installed;
[[hdf5-override]]HDF5_CPP:: preprocessor flags needed to find and use the HDF5 headers;
HDF5_CXX:: compiler flags needed to build programs with HDF5;
HDF5_LD:: linker flags needed to link programs to the HDF5 library;

Run `make help-overrides` for a complete list of available overrides.
